# **UNIT 2: APPLICATION OF DIFFERENTIATION**

# <u>L9. Linear and Quadratic Approximations</u>

### Linear Approximations

$$
\begin{gather}
f(x) \approx f\left(x_{0}\right)+f^{\prime}\left(x_{0}\right)\left(x-x_{0}\right) \\ \\
\Delta f \approx f^{\prime} \Delta x
\end{gather}
$$

- 1st exam: $\lim _{x \rightarrow 0} \frac{(1+2 x)^{10}-1}{x} \approx \frac{1+20 x-1}{x}=20$

### Quadratic Approximations

- (They are only used when higher accuracy is needed.)
  (3B1B: Taylor Series...)

$$
f(x) \approx f\left(x_{0}\right)+f^{\prime}\left(x_{0}\right)\left(x-x_{0}\right)+\frac{f^{\prime \prime}\left(x_{0}\right)}{2}\left(x-x_{0}\right)^{2}
$$

# <u>L10. Curve Sketching</u>

## Rubric for curve-sketching

1. (Precalc skill) <u>Plot the discontinuities of $f-$ especially the infinite ones!</u>
2. Find the critical points. These are the points at which $f(x)=0$ (usually where the slope changes from positive to negative, or vice versa.)
2. (a) Plot the critical points (and critical values), but only if it's relatively easy to do so.
(b) Decide the sign of $f(x)$ in between the critical points (if it's not already obvious).
4. (Precalc skill) Find and plot the zeros of $f$. These are the values of $x$ for which $f(x)=0$. Only do this if it's relatively easy.
5. (Precalc skill) Determine the behavior at the endpoints (or at $\pm \infty$ ).

### 2nd Derivative Information

1. Deciding whether a critical point is a maximum or a minimum. This is known as <u>the second derivative test.</u>
2. Concave/convex "decoration."
3. The points where $f=0$ are called inflection points. Usually, at these points the graph changes from concave up to down, or vice versa.

# <u>L11. Max/Min Problems</u>

- Moral: Don't forget endpoints. If you only look at critical points you may find the worst answer, rather than the best one.

# <u>L12. Related Rates</u>

- e.g.2

$$
\begin{aligned}
&V=\frac{1}{3} \pi r^{2} h=\frac{4}{75} \pi h^{3} \quad(r=4, h=10) \\ \\
&\frac{d V}{d t}=\frac{d h}{d t} \frac{4}{25} \pi h^{2} \\ \\
&\frac{d h}{d t}=\frac{\frac{d V}{d t}}{\frac{4}{25} \pi h^{2}}=\frac{1}{2 \pi} \quad\left(\frac{d V}{d t}=2 ; h=5\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

# <u>L13. Newton's Method and Other Applications</u>

$$
x_{k+1}=x_{k}-\frac{f\left(x_{k}\right)}{f^{\prime}\left(x_{k}\right)}
$$

### Ring on a String...

# <u>L14. Mean Value Theorem and Inequalities</u>

### Mean-Value Theorem (MVT)

- If $f(x)$ is differentiable on $a<x<b$, and continuous on $a \leq x \leq b$, then
  $$
  \frac{f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}=f^{\prime}(c) \quad(\text {for some } c, a<c<b)
  $$
  - change the name of b to $x$:
    $$
    f(x)=f(a)+f^{\prime}(c)(x-a) \quad(\text {for some } c, a<c<x)
    $$

# <u>L15. Differentials and Antiderivatives</u>

### Differentials

- New notation: $d y=f^{\prime}(x) d x \quad(y=f(x))$
  Both $d y$ and $f^{\prime}(x) d x$ are called differentials

### Anti-derivatives

$$
F^{\prime}(x)=f(x) \quad \rightarrow \quad F(x)=\int f(x) d x
$$

- $F$ is the antiderivative of $f$
- Uniqueness of the antiderivative up to an additive constant.

### Method of substitution and "advanced guessing"

- e.g.5 $\int \sin x \cos x d x=\frac{1}{2} \sin ^{2} x+c=-\frac{1}{2} \cos ^{2} x+c$
- e.g.6 $\int \frac{d x}{x \ln x}$
  - Let $ u=\ln x \quad \rightarrow \quad d u=\frac{1}{x} d x \quad \rightarrow$

$$
\int \frac{d x}{x \ln x}=\int \frac{1}{u} d u=\ln u+c=\ln (\ln (x))+c
$$
# <u>L16. Differential Equations and Separation of Variables</u>

### Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs)

- e.g.2 $\left(\frac{d}{d x}+x\right) y=0 \quad\left(\right.$ or $\left.\frac{d y}{d x}+x y=0\right)$
  - separate variables: $\quad \frac{d y}{y}=-x d x$
  - take the antiderivative of both sides:

$$
\int \frac{d y}{y}=-\int x d x \quad \rightarrow \quad \ln |y|=-\frac{x^{2}}{2}+c \quad \rightarrow \\ \\
|y|=e^{c} e^{-x^{2} / 2} \quad \rightarrow \quad y=a e^{-x^{2} / 2} \quad\left(a=\pm e^{c}\right)
$$










